{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 UNIT 2\par
FOUNDATION OF LANGUAGE , COMMUNICATIVE GRAMMAR AND ITS APPROPRIATENESS ,REVISION OF TENSES , USES OF CONJUCTIONS ,USES OF PREPOSITIONS , SPEECH  WORD ORDER SENTENCE STUCTURE\par
\ul\b FOUNDATION OF LANGUAGE \ulnone\b0\par
Language acquisition in children process involve biological, cognitive, and social aspect. The development of human language is unique, how those aspect affecting the acquisition and development. \par
\ul\b The Biological basis of language\ulnone\b0\par
The biological aspect of language involve brain function, age, and gender. About human brain, The localization of function. Each human part has specialize task, then which part of human brain to produce language. Human brain is divided into two hemispheres, left part concern with analytic, time-based processing. The right hemisphere concern with holistic, spatially based processing. Language function localized in the left hemispheres. In addition, Broca has function to produce language, and wernicke has function to understand the language.\par
Gender also influence of language competence, Girl have greater verbal ability than boys, but boys better in mathematical and spatial task (Kolb & Whishaw, 1996). But to finding the different where the brain is difficult, it tend to cultural factors than biological causes.\par
 Critical period hypothesis, The critical period start from age of 2 up to 7. It not only about spoken language but also cognitive development. However adult can learn sign language but it less efficiently. Degree of flexibility of critical only happen in an early childhood. Critical period also effectively to acquire second language acquisition.\par
\ul\b The Cognitive Basis of Language: The Cognition Hypothesis\ulnone\b0\par
The development of children language take place in some cognitive stages. The first is sensor motor period, child has only innate reflexes start birth up to 2 years old, child also achieve concept of object. Then pre-operational stage, child have perception and capable of symbol function which influenced by own perception of environment until age of 4. Next, concrete operation at the age of 7-11/12 child has logical reason especially for real or seen object. The last formal operation stages think about potential events or abstract ideas logically at the age of 11/12. In short, cognitive hypothesis stated that cognitive development drives linguistic development, Even Sincliar-de-Zwart (1969) explained language training on has small effect or does no affect basic cognitive process and only help in description to focus relevant aspect of task.Foundation of Language.\par
\ul\b The Social Basis of Language\ulnone\b0\par
Social interaction affecting language acquisition and development. It has function as context when certain utterance conveyed properly and to develop words, phrases, sentences in real situation. It also involve emotional, malnutrition, and social deprivation, because language is social meaningful situation. Social interaction start from first interaction with mother, family, adult, other people, and environment. Therefore, for effective language learning must take place in social setting. Social interaction also is needed in acquisition language to support cognitive development. The social has function context of LASS (Language Acquisition Socialization System). In short, social setting are important for linguistic development to provide feedback from adult to children as vital role in development. It also has role to facilities the task of learning grammar for instant usually parent repeat more ill-formed utterances than well-formed one.\par
\b Past Tense\par
\b0 This tense is used to refer to something that happened in the past. Sometimes, past tense is also called as \lquote simple past tense\rquote . Example: We stayed in a hotel.\par
\b Past continuous tense\b0 : This type of past tense is used to describe an event or occurrence that is ongoing or continuing in the past. Example: We were playing tennis at the club. \par
\b Past Perfect Tense\b0 : This type of tense is used to describe an event in the past that has been completed. Example: We had completed our match before she had come.        \par
\b Past Perfect Continuous\b0 : This type of past tense verb is used to indicate an event, action or occurrence that started before another event, action or occurrence in the past. We can say that one action or event interrupted another. Example: I had been playing the drums since school time\b .\par
Present Tense\par
\b0 This tense is used to refer or indicate to something that occurs in the present. The simple present or indefinite present tense is used to describe an action, event, or condition that is occurring in the present while being spoken about or written. Example: The dogs\rquote  bark.\par
\b Present Continuous Tense: \b0 This tense indicates the continuous nature of an act or event in the present and has not been completed. The activity has begun in the past and will be completed in the future. Example: She is preparing chicken sandwiches for breakfast.\par
\b Present Perfect Tense: \b0 This tense is used to describe an action that had begun in the past, continues into the present and has just been completed. The time of occurrence of the action is generally not mentioned. This tense is also used to describe an action happened in the past before another action took place. Example: I have just completed my dinner.\par
\b Present Perfect Continuous Tense\b0 : This tense is used to describe an action, event or occurrence that has begun in the past and continues into the present. It is also used for an action that began and just finished in the past or in cases where there is no mention of time. Example: They have been trying to contact her.\par
\b Future Tense\b0\par
This tense is used to refer to or indicate something that hasn\rquote t happened at the time of speaking or writing. \lquote Simple Future Tense\rquote  commonly formed with the use of words \lquote will\rquote  and \lquote shall\rquote . Example: We shall be there by noon.\par
\b Future Continuous Tense: \b0 This tense is used to describe actions that are ongoing or continuing in the future. It is commonly used in sentences by using the simple future tense of the verb with the present participle i.e \lquote -ing\rquote . Example: His parents will be attending the convocation.\par
\b Future Perfect Tense\b0 : Is used to refer or describe an event that will be completed sometime in the future before another action takes place. It is written by using the past participle of the verb with the simple future tense of the verb. Example: I will have completed 10 years of work in August this year.\par
\b Future Perfect Continuous Tense: \b0 This tense is used to describe an action that is continuing into the future and will be completed at a specified time in the future. This tense is written using the future perfect tense of the verb with the present participle. Example: I shall have been living in Mumbai for five years by May 2019. \par
\par
\ul\b TENSE\par
Complete the following sentences using the correct form of the verb given in brackets.\ulnone\b0\par
1. The thief ................ (catch) red-handed.\par
2. A bomb scare ................ (delay) the flight by almost two hours.\par
3. The stadium .................... (reverberate) with dance, music and drama as troupes from different parts of the country ................... (present) a panorama of color and costume.\par
4. I .................. (spend) the whole day yesterday in bed.\par
5. Students from different parts of the country .................. (participate) in the program.\par
6. It is true that Jim-Corbett .................. (love) animals but he also ................. (kill) many man-eaters.\par
7. I .................... (learn) Telugu from a friend who ................... (hail) from Andhra Pradesh.\par
8. The bridge across the river .................. (build) some two hundred years ago.\par
9. The wicked people who ................ (smuggle) brown sugar into the town ................. (arrest) yesterday.\par
10. Last night, the clouds ................. (thunder) in the sky.\par
11. Every Monday, Sally (drive) ---------her kids to football practice.\par
12. Usually, I (work) ---------as a secretary at ABT, but this summer I (study) \par
 French at a language school in Paris. That is why I am in Paris.\par
13. Shhhhh! Be quiet! John ................(sleep) \par
14. Don't forget to take your umbrella. It........... (rain) \par
15. I hate living in Seattle because it............... (rain, always) \par
16. I'm sorry I can't hear what you ........(say) because everybody (talk) so loudly.\par
17. Justin .......(write, currently) a book about his adventures in Tibet. I hope he can find a good publisher when he is finished.\par
18. Jim: Do you want to come over for dinner tonight?\par
Denise: Oh, I'm sorry, I can't. I .........(go) to a movie tonight with some friends.\par
19. The business cards......... (be, normally ) printed by a company in New York. Their prices .......(be) inexpensive, yet the quality of their work is quite good.\par
20. This delicious chocolate....... (be) made by a small chocolatier in Zurich, Switzerland.\par
\par
\ul\b Use the verbs in brackets to complete the sentences. Use the correct tense.\ulnone\b0\par
1. When I ....(look) out of the window, I ..........(see) John.\par
2. you ever ...........(play) the piano since you left school?\par
3. I ............(not see) him for two days.\par
4. When he ...........(try) to open the door, he ..........(drop) his key.\par
5. They ...........(live) in this house since 1987.\par
6. My father .......(wash) his car while my mother and I ........(prepare) dinner.\par
7. you ..........(meet) her yesterday?\par
8. Mary............. (be) in London for three days.\par
9. The headmaster .......(enter) the classroom when they.......... (write) their exams.\par
10. He ..............(buy) a new car last week.\par
11. I think that they ............(arrive) tomorrow morning.\par
12. Last Wednesday they .......(play) chess after they ........(do) their homework.\par
\par
\ul\b Fill in the blanks using the correct form of the verbs.\ulnone\b0\par
1. Hardly had the minister finished his speech when the earthquake .....(shake) the stadium.\par
2. Everybody will be at the office at about 08:30 tomorrow as the meeting ....(start) at nine o'clock.\par
3. That candidate who we had been interviewed before we .....(speak) to all the others is still my favorite.\par
4. While climbing onto the mountain top, I...... (encounter) a strange animal which I'd never seen before.\par
5. The chairman was sure that his plan would work out fine as no other member .......(oppose) it up to that time.\par
6. I wasn't surprised to hear that Monica ......(have) an accident as she is a very reckless driver.\par
7. Since the very first day when the Umbrella Company embarked upon such a dangerous and risky lab-research, very strange incidents ......(take place) within the research complex.\par
8-9. Urbanization ......... (always / be) a problem which causes several environmental challenges ever since the rate of migration ......... (increase) after the industrial revolution.\par
10. When I ......(come) home this evening, my parents had gone out for a walk.\par
11. By the time the troops....... (arrive), the war will have ended.\par
12. By the year 2020, linguists .......(study) the Indy-European language family for more than 200 years.\par
13. Gasoline .......(become) a major problem for people for the last ten years, therefore, during this time many people have preferred to sell their cars and buy smaller ones.\par
14. By the time he was 14, Wolfgang Mozart ........(compose) an enviable number of musical pieces.\par
15. Nothing in my life ........(be) so strong to stop me achieve my goals so far and i don't think anything will be.\par
16. Archaeologists ..........(explain) recently that an ancient underground city around Cappadocia has long wide corridors where there are many special areas for making cheese and wine.\par
17. I was amazed when he accepted a drink, since I...... (always / assume) that he was a teetotaler.\par
18. I .........(play) tennis tomorrow but I won't be able to do that because I have injured my right ankle.\par
19. We ........(visit) the seashore many times before but last summer we enjoyed ourselves more than ever.\par
20. According to a survey, thousands of vending machines .........(have to be converted) before the new coins have come into circulation.\par
\ul\b USES OF CONJUCTIONS \par
\ulnone\b0 Conjunctions are the connecting words that are used to connect or join other words in a sentence or phrases together to form a proper and appropriate sentence.\par
The main function of this part of speech (conjunction) is to link words or join words together in such a way that it forms an interesting sentence. The parts that are connected by a conjunction are known as conjuncts of the conjunctions. For each language, conjunctions must be defined in a separate way because the definition might be in risk of getting overlapped with the definitions of a few other parts of speech.\par
\b Some Examples of Conjunctions are: and, but, because, since, while, etc.\b0\par
Conjunctions may also be phrases in some cases. A few examples of phrase conjunctions are- \ldblquote as well as\rdblquote , \ldblquote provided that\rdblquote , and so on. \par
A few times, conjunctions can also be present in the beginning of a sentence. For example, \ldblquote But she was denied the right to sit for exams.\rdblquote\par
\b Types and Uses of Conjunctions\b0\par
Conjunctions are of three types and these three types are further divided or separated into different parts.\par
Three types of conjunctions are:\par
Coordinating Conjunctions\par
Subordinating Conjunctions\par
Correlative Conjunctions.\par
\b 1. Coordinating Conjunctions: \b0\par
This type of conjunction links equal parts of a sentence or tries to join two equal elements of a sentence which includes phrases or clauses. Coordinating conjunctions are also known as coordinators.  \par
A comma is used when two coordinating conjunctions are used to join or connect two independent clauses or phrases.\par
There are seven types of words in coordinating conjunctions and these types can be easily remembered by the most commonly used mnemonic acronym.\par
FANBOYS: for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so.\par
\b For \b0 - It explains reason or sight's purpose.\par
Example: I will overcome this obstacle, for I am not weak. \par
\b And \b0\f1\endash  It helps to add one phrase or clause to another similar one\par
Example: Rima ate eggs and bacon at brunch\par
Rahul and his brother look alike.\par
\b Nor \b0 - It is used to add a negative idea to an already existing negative idea.\par
Example: Seta is neither hungry nor thirsty.\par
I don\rquote t like mango nor do I like apples. \tab\par
\b But\b0  - It helps us to show a contrast.\par
Example: Hanna loved her little puppy, but she couldn\rquote t take it to the school.\par
Sheena loved ice cream but due to cold or flu, she couldn\rquote t have it.\par
\b Or \b0 - It helps to add an alternative to an already existing positive alternative.\par
Example:  would you prefer tea or coffee?\par
Be ready to leave by 10 am, or else we\rquote ll leave without you.\par
\b Yet\b0  - It helps us to provide a contrasting idea to an existing logical idea or point.\par
Example: The play had a great beginning, yet it fell flat in act three.\par
Sheetal fears other dogs yet she loves my sister\rquote s poodle.\par
\b So\b0  - It is usually used to indicate or show a result or consequence of an event.\par
Example:  My cat was hungry so I fed her.\par
I am allergic to wheat, so I can\rquote t have that sandwich.\par
There are a few other coordinating conjunctions except FANBOYS. They are mostly used in British English. These coordinating conjunctions are- \ldblquote and nor\rdblquote , \ldblquote but nor\rdblquote , \ldblquote or nor\rdblquote , \ldblquote neither\rdblquote , \ldblquote no more\rdblquote , \ldblquote only\rdblquote . \par
\b The 4 types of coordinating conjunctions are as follows:-\b0\par
Cumulative conjunctions\par
Adversative conjunctions\par
Alternative conjunctions\par
Illative conjunctions.\par
\b 2. Subordinating Conjunctions: \b0\par
Subordinating conjunctions are simply the word/words that are used to join a subordinating clause to another clause or sentence. Subordinating conjunctions are also known as subordinators. The following are the most common subordinating conjunctions used in English language- after, although, as, as far as, as if, as long as, as soon as, as though, because, before, even if, even though, every time, if, in order that, since, so, so that, than, that, though, unless, until, when, whenever, where, whereas, wherever, and while\par
The subordinating conjunctions have two main functions in the English language. They are-\par
It illustrates the importance of the independent clause clearly.\par
Forms a relation between the main clause and the subordinate clause. Provides a transition from the main clause to the subordinating clause and creates a connection between the two.\par
For example: \lquote\rquote  He was annoyed, the train had stopped.\rquote\rquote\par
(Change the sentence using subordinating conjunctions)\par
\lquote\rquote He was annoyed because the train had stopped.\rquote\rquote\par
(Because is the subordinating sentence used in the above example)\par
The most commonly used subordinating conjunctions are: because, since, while, though, although, until, when, where, once. These words show us the relation in time, place, situation, or condition.\par
\b few sentences using subordinating conjunctions:\b0\par
Sarita took an umbrella \b because\b0  it was raining.\par
\b Although \b0 she was disabled, she was involved in many social service campaigns.\par
\b Until \b0 spring arrives, we have to be prepared for more snow.\par
He was working hard while his wife was recovering at home.\par
\b Though\b0  they were not rich, they made monthly donations for the betterment of society.\par
Ever \b since \b0 she left her job, she has been actively taking care of her children at home.\par
\b 3. Correlative Conjunctions:\b0\par
\f0 They are paired conjunctions that are generally used together like neither\'85\'85nor, not\'85\'85only, but\'85\'85also, both\'85and, either\'85.or, whether\'85.or, no sooner\'85..than, rather\'85.or etc. These conjunctions connect or join two balanced phrases or words. Correlative conjunctions exist in pairs.\f1\par
\b Few sentences of correlative conjunctions are:\b0\par
We can \b either\b0  go to Greece \b or \b0 Spain for our holiday.\par
\b Not only \b0 is he a professional footballer, \b but\b0  he\rquote s also a successful businessman.\par
\b Neither\b0  Norway \b nor\b0  Switzerland is in the England Union.\par
\b Whether\b0  you love them \b or\b0  hate them.\par
\b No sooner \b0 had I finished watering the garden than it started raining.\par
Would you rather go shopping \b or\b0  spend the day at the beach?\par
\par
\b\f0\lang1033 EXERCISE \par
Complete each sentence using the subordinating conjunction from the parenthesis:\par
\b0 1) I visit the Grand Canyon _________ I go to Arizona. (once, whenever, wherever)\par
2)This is the place _________ we stayed last time we visited. (where, when, how)\par
3)_________ you win first place, you will receive a prize. (wherever, if, unless)\par
4)You won\rquote t pass the test _________ you study. (when, if, unless)\par
5)I could not get a seat, _________ I came early. (as, though, when)\par
6)We are leaving Wednesday _________ or not it rains. (if, whether, though)\par
7)Pay attention to your work _________ you will not make mistakes. (so that, unless, or)\par
8)The musicians delivered a rousing performance _________ they had rehearsed often. (though, as, once)\par
9)She\rquote s honest _________ everyone trusts her. (if, so, when)\par
10)Write this down _________ you forget. (or, when, lest)\par
\par
Complete each sentence using the correct correlative conjunction pair from the parenthesis:\par
\par
1) I plan to take my vacation _________ in June _________ in July. (whether / or, either / or, as / if)\par
2) _________ I\rquote m feeling happy _________ sad, I try to keep a positive attitude. (either / or, whether / or, when / I\rquote m)\par
3) ________ had I taken my shoes off _________ I found out we had to leave again. (no sooner / than, rather / than, whether / or)\par
4) _________ only is dark chocolate delicious, _________ it can be healthy. (whether / or, not / but, just as / so)\par
5) ________ I have salad for dinner, _____________________I can have ice cream for dessert. (if /then, when / than, whether / or)\par
6) ________ flowers _________ trees grow _________ during warm weather. (not only / or, both / and, not / but)\par
7) _________ do we enjoy summer vacation, _________ we _________ enjoy winter break. (whether / or, not only / but also, either / or)\par
8) Calculus is _________ easy _________ difficult _________ (not / but, both / and, either / or)\par
9) It\rquote s _________ going to rain _________ snow tonight. (as / if, either / or, as / as)\par
10) Savory flavors are _________ sweet _________ sour. (often / and, neither / nor, both / and)\par
\par
\ul\b\lang9 USES OF PREPOSITIONS \par
\ulnone\b0 A preposition is a word or group of words used before a noun, pronoun, or noun phrase to show direction, time, place, location, spatial relationships, or to introduce an object. Some examples of prepositions are words like "in," "at," "on," "of," and "to."\par
\b A Few Rules\par
Prepositions of Direction\b0\par
\b To refer to a direction, use the prepositions "to," "in," "into," "on," and "onto."\b0\par
She drove to the store.\par
Don\rquote t ring the doorbell. Come right in(to) the house.\par
Drive on(to) the grass and park the car there.\b\par
Prepositions of Time\b0\par
\b To refer to one point in time, use the prepositions "in," "at," and "on."\b0\par
\b Use "in" with parts of the day (not specific times), months, years, and seasons.\par
\b0 He reads in the evening.\par
The weather is cold in December.\par
She was born in 1996.\par
We rake leaves in the fall.\par
\b Use "at" with the time of day. Also use "at" with noon, night, and midnight.\b0\par
I go to work at 8:00.\par
He eats lunch at noon.\par
She often goes for a walk at night.\par
They go to bed at midnight.\par
\b Use "on" with days.\b0\par
I work on Saturdays.\par
He does laundry on Wednesdays.\par
\b To refer to extended time, use the prepositions "since," "for," "by," "during," "from\'85to," "from\'85until," "with," and "within."\b0\par
I have lived in Minneapolis since 2005. (I moved there in 2005 and still live there.)\par
He will be in Toronto for 3 weeks. (He will spend 3 weeks in Toronto.)\par
She will finish her homework by 6:00. (She will finish her homework sometime between now and 6:00.)\par
He works part time during the summer. (For the period of time throughout the summer.)\par
I will collect data from January to June. (Starting in January and ending in June.)\par
They are in school from August until May. (Starting in August and ending in May.)\par
She will graduate within 2 years. (Not longer than 2 years.)\par
\b Prepositions of Place\b0\par
\b To refer to a place, use the prepositions "in" (the point itself), "at" (the general vicinity), "on" (the surface), and "inside" (something contained).\b0\par
They will meet in the lunchroom.\par
She was waiting at the corner.\par
He left his phone on the bed.\par
Place the pen inside the drawer.\par
\b To refer to an object higher than a point, use the prepositions "over" and "above." To refer to an object lower than a point, use the prepositions "below," "beneath," "under," and "underneath."\b0\par
The bird flew over the house.\par
The plates were on the shelf above the cups.\par
Basements are dug below ground.\par
There is hard wood beneath the carpet.\par
The squirrel hid the nuts under a pile of leaves.\par
The cat is hiding underneath the box.\par
\b  To refer to an object close to a point, use the prepositions "by," "near," "next to," "between," "among," and "opposite."\b0\par
The gas station is by the grocery store.\par
The park is near her house.\par
Park your bike next to the garage.\par
There is a deer between the two trees.\par
There is a purple flower among the weeds.\par
The garage is opposite the house.\par
\b Prepositions of Location\b0\par
\b To refer to a location, use the prepositions "in" (an area or volume), "at" (a point), and "on" (a surface).\b0\par
They live in the country. (an area)\par
She will find him at the library. (a point)\par
There is a lot of dirt on the window. (a surface)\par
\b Prepositions of Spatial Relationships\b0\par
\b To refer to a spatial relationship, use the prepositions "above," "across," "against," "ahead of," "along," "among," "around," "behind," "below,"\par
"beneath," "beside," "between," "from," "in front of," "inside," "near," "off," "out of," "through," "toward," "under," and "within."\b0\par
The post office is across the street from the grocery store.\par
We will stop at many attractions along the way.\par
The kids are hiding behind the tree.\par
His shirt is off.\par
Walk toward the garage and then turn left.\par
Place a check mark within the box.\par
\par
\b\par
\b0\par
\par
}
 